---
layout: post
title: GSoC 2021 Final Report
---

# Introduction
I worked with AFLplusplus team in Google Summer of Code 2021 this summer. This is the final report on my project "Scheduler for LibAFL". LibAFL is a new fuzzing framework for customizable fuzzers. I have ported two well-known scheduling algorithms into LibAFL.

# Schedulers
The two schedulers I've ported are "AFL Fast scheduler" and "MOpt mutator". If you are interested, you can check out the original thesis to find out more.  
- [AFLFast](https://mboehme.github.io/paper/CCS16.pdf)  
- [MOpt](https://www.usenix.org/system/files/sec19-lyu.pdf)  

In short, AFLFast scheduler favors inputs that exercises a less frequent program path, and MOpt mutator utilizes the *partical swarm optimization algorithm* (some fancy magic xD) to select the optimal mutation operator (MOpt is actually implemented as a mutator in LibAFL).   
These two schedulers were already incorporated into AFLplusplus, so my job is mainly to port that code in a Rust way.  

## AFLFast
AFL already uses the average exec time, the average bitmap size, and various stuff to calculate the `perf_score`. If the score is high, then we fuzz that corpus entry more. (this is called power schedule by the way). Therefore, this score is used to decide how hard we fuzz a corpus entry. Conceptually this is something like this code. 
```
let perf_score = calculate_score(corpus_entry)
for i in 0..perf_score {
    let input = mutate(corpus_entry);
    execute(input);
}
```
AFLFast additionally looks at how many times each program path has been taken for calculating the `perf_score`. Roughly speaking, I have to add three components to LibAFL.

- Calibration stage for collecting metadata from each queue corpus entry
- PowerSchedule stage for actually calculating the `perf_score`
- Extending the testcase and the queue corpus entry for PowerSchedule stage.

## MOpt
There are plenty of mutation logics in fuzzing, such as byteflip, bitflip, etc. In havoc mode, which mutation to apply to the corpus entry is usually random. Here in LibAFL, MOpt mutator optimizes on the distribution each mutation logic is chosen based on the number of new paths and crashes each mutation operator has found.

# Others
Schdulers are not the only things I worked on during the GSoC period. Besides the two schedulers, I have also worked on forkserver support for LibAFL. 

# Contributions
Here's all pull requests that I've submitted  

[Merged pull requests](https://github.com/AFLplusplus/LibAFL/pulls?q=is%3Apr+author%3Atokatoka+is%3Amerged)
